[v2.12] Add Documentation for RKE1 Cluster Cleanup (#1879)
rancher/rancher-docs: docs/getting-started/installation-and-upgrade/other-installation-methods/rancher-on-a-single-node-with-docker/upgrade-docker-installed-rancher.md

## Upgrade

:::danger 
The Rancher upgrade to version 2.12 will be blocked if any RKE1-related resources are detected.  

> For detailed cleanup and recovery steps, refer to the [RKE1 Resource Validation and Upgrade Requirements](#rke1-resource-validation-and-upgrade-requirements-in-rancher-v212).

Reviewer: Thank you for the update! Rephrased a bit here and added EOL information context, let me know what you think.

- This allows Rancher to clean up associated resources and finalizers.

### 2. Post-Upgrade Failure Due to Residual RKE1 Resources

If the upgrade to Rancher v2.12.0 or later is attempted without prior cleanup of RKE1 resources:

- The upgrade will fail and display an error listing the resource names that are preventing the upgrade.
- This occurs because Rancher includes validation to detect and block upgrades when unsupported RKE1 resources are still present.
- To proceed, [rollback](#rolling-back) to the previous Rancher version, delete the identified resources, and then retry after [manual cleanup](#manual-cleanup-after-rollback).

:::note Helm-based Rancher
Helm-based Rancher installations are not affected by this issue, as Rancher remains available during the upgrade and can perform resource cleanup as needed.
:::

### Manual Cleanup After Rollback

Users should take the following steps after rolling back to a previous Rancher version:

- **Manually delete** the resources listed in the upgrade error message (e.g., RKE1 clusters, NodeTemplates, ClusterTemplates).
- If deletion is blocked due to **finalizers**, edit the resources and remove the `metadata.finalizers` field.

> - If a **validating webhook** prevents deletion (e.g., for the `system-project`), please refer to the [Bypassing the Webhook](../../../../reference-guides/rancher-webhook.md#bypassing-the-webhook)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If a **validating webhook** prevents deletion (e.g., for the `system-project`), please refer to the [Bypassing the Webhook](../../../../reference-guides/rancher-webhook.md#bypassing-the-webhook) documentation.
```

## RKE1 Resource Validation and Upgrade Requirements in Rancher v2.12

Starting in Rancher v2.12, support for RKE1 (Rancher Kubernetes Engine v1) has been removed. During upgrade, Rancher validates the cluster resources and blocks the upgrade if any RKE1-related resources are detected.

This validation affects the following resource types:

- Clusters with `rkeConfig` (`clusters.management.cattle.io`)
- NodeTemplates (`nodetemplates.management.cattle.io`)
- ClusterTemplates (`clustertemplates.management.cattle.io`)

This is particularly relevant for single-node Docker installations, where Rancher is not running during the upgrade. In such cases, controllers are not available to clean up deprecated resources automatically, and the upgrade process will fail early with an error listing the blocking resources.

### 1. Pre-upgrade (Recommended)

Before upgrading, while Rancher is still running:

- Run the pre-upgrade cleanup script to delete all RKE1 clusters and templates.
- This allows Rancher to clean up associated resources and finalizers.

```

> #!/bin/bash

Reviewer 2: Good idea. Debating whether we want to pin it to `v2.12.0` tag or have it point to `main` branch so in case we fix/improve the script it will be "automagically" updated in docs. The counter-argument is if we go with `main` link then potentially untested changes will be live immediately.
Leaning towards the latter just to be safe and we can bump to a newer tag in docs as needed.

Remove the previous Rancher server container. If you only stop the previous Rancher server container (and don't remove it), the container may restart after the next server reboot.

## RKE1 Resource Validation and Upgrade Requirements in Rancher v2.12

> Starting in Rancher v2.12, support for RKE1 (Rancher Kubernetes Engine v1) has been removed. During upgrade, Rancher validates the cluster resources and blocks the upgrade if any RKE1-related resources are detected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rancher v2.12.0 and later has removed support for the Rancher Kubernetes Engine (RKE/RKE1). During upgrade, Rancher validates the cluster resources and blocks the upgrade if any RKE1-related resources are detected.
```

This validation affects the following resource types:

- Clusters with `rkeConfig` (`clusters.management.cattle.io`)
- NodeTemplates (`nodetemplates.management.cattle.io`)
- ClusterTemplates (`clustertemplates.management.cattle.io`)

This is particularly relevant for single-node Docker installations, where Rancher is not running during the upgrade. In such cases, controllers are not available to clean up deprecated resources automatically, and the upgrade process will fail early with an error listing the blocking resources.

### 1. Pre-upgrade (Recommended)

Before upgrading, while Rancher is still running:

> - Run the pre-upgrade cleanup script to delete all RKE1 clusters and templates. You can find the script [here](https://github.com/rancher/rancher/blob/v2.12.0/chart/scripts/pre-upgrade-hook.sh).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Run the `pre-upgrade-hook` cleanup script to delete all RKE1 clusters and templates. You can find the script in the Rancher GitHub repository: [pre-upgrade-hook.sh](https://github.com/rancher/rancher/blob/v2.12.0/chart/scripts/pre-upgrade-hook.sh).
```

- This allows Rancher to clean up associated resources and finalizers.

### 2. Post-Upgrade Failure Due to Residual RKE1 Resources

> If the upgrade to Rancher v2.12 is attempted without prior cleanup of RKE1 resources:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the upgrade to Rancher v2.12.0 or later is attempted without prior cleanup of RKE1 resources:
```

- The upgrade will fail and display an error listing the resource names that are preventing the upgrade.
- This occurs because Rancher includes validation to detect and block upgrades when unsupported RKE1 resources are still present.
- To proceed, [rollback](#rolling-back) to the previous Rancher version, delete the identified resources, and then retry after [manual cleanup](#manual-cleanup-after-rollback).

:::note Helm-based Rancher
Helm-based Rancher installations are not affected by this issue, as Rancher remains available during the upgrade and can perform resource cleanup as needed.
:::

### Manual Cleanup After Rollback

Users should take the following steps after rolling back to a previous Rancher version:

- **Manually delete** the resources listed in the upgrade error message (e.g., RKE1 clusters, NodeTemplates, ClusterTemplates).
- If deletion is blocked due to **finalizers**, edit the resources and remove the `metadata.finalizers` field.

> - If a **validating webhook** prevents deletion (e.g., for the `system-project`), please refer to this [documentation](https://ranchermanager.docs.rancher.com/reference-guides/rancher-webhook#bypassing-the-webhook)

Reviewer: Updating link to relative file path link instead of URL here
